PAYARA-4215: Describe preconditions for persistent timers in deployment groups (#661)
payara/Payara-Server-Documentation: documentation/payara-server/deployment-groups/timers.adoc

= Timers in Deployment Groups

Timer facilities provided by EJB APIs `TimerService` and `@Scheduled` need special configuration in order to work intuitively for applications deployed to a deployment group.

There are four types of timers distinguished by their lifecycle (persistent, non-persistent) and the mean of their definition (declarative, programmatic).

Declarative timers are defined in EJB deployment descriptors or with annotation `@Scheduled`.
Programmatic timers are created via calls to `TimerService.create*Timer`.

== Non-Persistent Timers

> Non-Persistent timers exist only in memory for duration in which the application runs of the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-Persistent timers exist in memory only for the duration in which the application runs on the instance.
```

> Declarative non-persistent timers run on every instace, programmatic ones only on instance that created them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Declarative non-persistent timers run on every instance, whereas programmatic ones only on the instance that created them.
```

> When instance shuts down, the timer stops firing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the instance shuts down, the timer stops firing.
```

> Instances do not see each others timers, calling `TimerService.getTimers()` only returns local non-persistent timers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instances do not see each other's non-persistent timers, so calling `TimerService.getTimers()` only returns local non-persistent timers.
```

> Non-Persistent timers have simpler lifecycle, but are not default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-Persistent timers have a simpler lifecycle but are not the default option
```

> `@Schedule` annotation needs attribute `persistent=false`, and `TimerConfig` objects also need to have their property `persistent` set to `false` explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make a timer non-persistent, the `@Schedule` annotation needs the attribute `persistent=false`, or the `TimerConfig` objects also need to have their property `persistent` set to `false` explicitly.
```

> == Peristent Timers

Reviewer: Persistent

> Persistent timers exist in persistent store for entire time for which application is deployed to a domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Persistent timers exist in the persistent store for the entire time for which application is deployed to a domain.
```

> Contrary to non-persistent ones, each persistent timer is only executed on single instance of a deployment group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contrary to non-persistent ones, each persistent timer is only executed on a single instance of a deployment group.
```

> When instance shuts down, timer migrates to another instance and continues firing there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the instance shuts down, each persistent timer migrates to another instance in the application's deployment group and continues firing there.
```

> Persistent timers are therefore shared and `TimerService.getTimers()` returns all persistent timers, regardless of which instance created them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since persistent timers are shared, `TimerService.getTimers()` returns all persistent timers in the deployment group, regardless of which instance created them.
```

> Persistent timers are default kind of timers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Persistent timers are the default kind of timer.
```

> === Preconditions for using Persistent Timers in Deployment Group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Preconditions for using Persistent Timers in Deployment Groups
```

Because deployment groups do not need to share configurations amongst instances, there are several confiration and operational constraints that are not enforced by the server.

> To achieve correct behavior of persistent timers within deployment group, following conditions need to be met:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure correct behaviour of persistent timers within a deployment group, the following conditions need to be met:
```

> * EJB Timer Service needs to use shared storage -- external database or DataGrid

Reviewer 2: Here we can link to https://docs.payara.fish/documentation/payara-server/ejb/persistent-timers.html

> * All instances of deployment group and Domain Administration Server share the same configuration of EJB Timer Service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All instances of deployment groups and the Domain Administration Server share the same configuration of EJB Timer Service
```

* Applications with persistent timers are deployed to a deployment group and not managed on instance level afterwards

> * Instances are members of only single deployment group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Instances are members of only a single deployment group
```
